[Applause]
hey everyone I'm super excited to be
here so as the title suggests I'm going
to speak about the idea of sustainable
wearables and heirloom electronics
so if you go out shopping in America
today for clothes you will probably see
a scene very close to this one
surrounded by cheap clothes and lots of
them now I think this is a common
occurrence because of the economic
system we live in which is a capitalist
one but also other factors that are
largely part of that system
so in this presentation I'm going to
explore where capitalism has gotten the
fashion and the electronic industry and
where we may want to go from here as we
push fashion and electronics to merge
so I'm gonna start here before the
Industrial Revolution
now before the 1800s all clothing and
textiles were handmade all garments were
cut
all garments were cut and sewn by women
and the family or community tailors
then technological inventions like this
one the spinning jenny came around in
the 1700s which was then followed by the
sewing machine in the 1800s and these
kicked off the Industrial Revolution
so for the very first time the creation
of textiles and clothing were leaving
the home and being housed under large
factory roots
so when Industrial Revolution happens
this of course changed everything and
how fabric and clothing were produced
the first ready to wear clothing
collection was created which meant
standardized sizing and garments could
now be made in multiples and very
quickly
so customization was starting to be
traded for efficiency and sanitization
now the sewing machine became a very
common household tool and a really
important skill to learn it automated
the chore of hand stitching and brought
the standardization of Hut and so
patterns to the home but while still
allowing for some customization so
desktop 3d printers and the DIY movement
have been talked about as being part of
a revolution that makes the designer the
producer and the consumer all one person
but the sewing machine was really the
first of its kind to have this sort of
impact
now although ready-to-wear clothing was
more available up until the mid 1900s
many clothes were still handmade in
contrast today we think of handmade
clothing as being too labor-intensive so
that usually equates to being too
expensive and it's more of a novelty
today to get something custom fitted and
made just for us
men Dean used to be an art it still is
but it's just not practiced very much a
meticulous tailor or seamstress could
mend rips with threads unraveled from
hems and seams and skillfully weave them
into tears that became practically
invisible like this
so in the past the material the cloth
was worth more than labor so it made
sense to expand labor in order to save
the cloth and
today clothing is consumed is considered
a consumable item so the worth of this
cloth or the garment is not valued above
the labor and that it takes to mends
anymore mass manufacturing clothing is
so inexpensive that many people usually
just go out and buy a new piece of
clothing rather than spend the time to
fix it
if a button pops off today or a shirt it
gets a few holes in it it's usually
considered ruined unwearable and it's
donated or thrown in the trash
so really our relationship with clothing
has changed
when did this happen and why did it
happen when did clothing becomes so
expendable and when did fashion
designers become these demigods that
seemingly whipped clothing out of thin
air
in the book overdressed by Elizabeth
Kline she
starts with a history of the department
store and how it began to become
consolidated
she also points out that in the early
days of the American garment industry
clothing manufacturing was run by
independent almost mom-and-pop
businesses that sold through these
numerous department stores before they
became consolidated
in the 1970s there was a shopping mall
boom and also the disappearance of the
middle class led americans to start to
embrace this kind of crisis that they
were finding in department stores like
Kmart and Walmart
so globalization was growing rapidly in
the eighties in the 90s and mid-priced
brands began to shift to the bulk of
their production to the developing world
where labor and overhead costs were
fractionally of anywhere else from the
end of the 1990s began brands began to
look for new ways to increase profits
and
pricing battles ensued between
department stores aggressive ones and
they just started creating more and more
important prices more and more sales
so it came to me that the apparel
industry became synonymous with
globalization
consolidation and the economics of
publicly traded companies
so this brings us to the recent has and
in the last two decades something
totally remarkable has happened and what
I'm referring to is to fast fashion
this refers to the low cost clothing
collections that are usually
characterized let's throw away these our
clothing you can find in places like H&M
Zara and forever21 these companies have
a team of designers that turn out 10,000
pieces of clothing here in contrast to
say one luxury brand that used to or
still does create 100 pieces per year
now the fashion industry used to and it
still does but
they only used to have collections twice
a year and that spring/summer and that's
on a maternity but fast fashion and has
created something totally new and
they've collapsed the production line
down so they can produce up to 50
collections here just churning out
clothing into their stores as tansy
Hoskins put it in her book stitched up
quote fast fashion is the result of
competition having driven suppliers
shorter and shorter supply times and the
market is also characterized by large
international corporations owning
clusters of brands and operating them
internationally
so I think of having this experience
with our fashion and our clothing has
really led to a philosophy of constantly
lending and it's also led to a loss of
appreciation for craftsmanship and
clothing
craftsmanship and quality when it comes
to clothing
now I worked as a clothing designer and
a pattern director and
production seamstress as well so you
know I really seen people first and
scoff at prices
scoff at $30.00 for a shirt or anything
over and also at any price is over $60
for a dress so I think this is mainly
because a lot of us have website into
what it actually takes to produce the
clothing that we wear
in the 10-point anti fashion manifesto
offered by Lee at in corn she puts the
way we value clothes and what they have
this symbolizes this
quote prices profess that these clothes
are to be thrown away discarded as a
condom and forgotten before being lovely
savored teaching young consumers that
fashion has no value the culture of
fashion is thus destroyed unquote
it's a very interesting read
now technology has always been in close
relation with the fabric and the
garments that we were
weaving is one of the oldest crafts and
was among the first to become automated
the jacquard loom which is pictured here
was among the first uses of store data
and commercial production through the
use of punch cards you can see on the
front now interestingly enough the use
of punch cards these punch cards were
descendants of cars used in making
musical organs and music boxes and then
the sentence of these punch cards were
then used for mechanical calculating
machines and computer programming later
on
so we know technology today I think is
consumer electronics these are our
personal computers
is Arduino microcontrollers and they're
getting smaller and more ubiquitous
wearable technology has also been around
longer than some of you may think
for example this one can't changer at
the pocket watch
but wearable electronics has really been
the one bounding out the gates and into
the eyes of the masses lately starting
their social and data logging
experiments and becoming the next new
market that companies are looking to get
involved with and identified
so the consumer electronics industry has
some parallels to the fashion industry
that I'd like to talk about now it
doesn't go as far back as the user need
of clothes it starts in the 1990s but
they've also become very personal and
mobile and with the production getting
cheaper and smaller electronics can be
found in almost everything around us
so like fashion it's one overriding
characteristic is the trend of ever
falling prices I think this is partially
driven by gains in manufacturing
efficiency and it's also personally
driven by making profit margins larger
every year
so I also want to mention planned
obsolescence which is designing too many
of our electronic devices which causes
them to be throw away
this creates an excess of products just
as an example in one year in the u.s. we
can throw away 140 millions of but ends
up in the landfill
so this is another parallel to the
fashion industry and Vanessa Friedman
the New York Times fashion critic put it
really well she made the point that the
driving force of fashion is planned
obsolescence which is totally true if
you think about it she says something is
in Benin it's out skirts are up and they
are down today it's green tomorrow glue
which is self by definition about
something that is the opposite of
sustainable
so e-waste is dumped in places like
Indian China and the people who live
there are ultimately the ones who are
made responsible for extracting any
valuable ore metals that are recyclable
which is a very difficult process and a
very toxic one as well
so we purchase over 80 billion pieces of
clothing each year which is 400% more
clothing today than we did 20 years ago
and sadly like most of our electronic
devices they also in Memphis access in
landfills
so while working with wearable
electronics and indie textiles you get
the best of both worlds flexible fibers
with different qualifying properties and
the ability to run a signal through and
around places and materials that you
wouldn't normally cut to
but with the best you also get the worst
which I've already pointed on some of
them so precious metals are woven
knitted and embedded many layers of
natural synthetic and hybrid materials
and this ultimately makes the Mosin
fibers even more difficult to separate
so if not designed with care that
integration of these metals with fibers
can exacerbate an already difficult
recycling and reuse process
now electronics a new technology is
creeping into our lives more and more I
very recently just watched a talk given
by the subpoenaed Papadopoulos just a
few days ago and she really happen to
put some questions and concerns I've
been thinking about recently extremely
well so I'm gonna share that with you
and I'm probably gonna paraphrase a bit
so she asks if wearable technology
becomes part of our everyday life then
what kind of original self do we wanted
to promote what kind of values what kind
of idea of being
what kind of relationships can we make
can be made where value flows in all
directions and not just some how do we
make sure that we take care of each
other of our environment and everyone
you go and habits in what do we want
that to look like and how do we want to
make sure that everyone is valued I just
thought she really put that really well
so I'd also like to talk more about
value and some concepts of
sustainability that may help us to start
to address these questions I
think in my mind it really boils down to
the fact that we need to change our
relationship with our devices and the
clothing that we wear
we may want to change what we value
about them other than the bottom line or
the next deal
perhaps we need to derive value from the
narrative of the reduction of the Garmon
itself today wireless technologies such
as Bluetooth and RFID memes are being
developed and they're being marketed to
retail stores right now for new shopping
experiences and also ways to event
information into garment or accessory
and that's an example scenario that's
actually put out by a company called
anywhere who is developing this
technology
they talk about a scenario of when
you're walking down the street or say
you're standing in line for coffee and
you see someone who has a really cute
purse and you're thinking okay where did
you get that person I have to have one
so instead of actually asking her and
if the purse has a chip in it and you
haven't downloaded app you can stand at
the purse and it will pop up in the app
and it will tell you what color you can
get it in where to get it it gets on
sale and you can buy it right then and
there so you buy one for yourself one
for your mom one for your sister because
it's a really great deal
so imagine that this technology was
flipped on its head and instead of
getting information about where to buy
the first and more like it on sale you
learn about who made it and where they
came from so instead of educating the
consumer on the story of production and
the people behind it giving value to the
voices and stories to the hands that
that made the purse or the garment and
perhaps even what their specialty skills
are and how they applied it to crafting
the details you can something so really
gets you to look at the objects that
you're purchasing
now this would make production process
totally transparent and I bet large
Coulomb or it's my company thrilled to
do this of course at this time since a
lot of them tend to use their labor but
what if this could be a reality and who
would it be to push this concept in
front of people just just to let them
know that they may or they can value
something more than just a good deal
so what if this information also or
instead of tort told a narrative of the
wear of the garment allowing information
to flow across multi generations of
families or communities sharing stories
memories of where it was made within
that small community and remote local
crops I
think interesting patterns may even
emerge telling the history and
mythology's of the community and add to
the already rich symbology that clothing
provides
fashion as an art form is very important
like any art form it mirrors what's
going on in our communities and what's
going on in our times and it's something
that we hope are taken it's self
referential it's practical and as poetic
fabrics shield you from whether material
choices can communicate how rich you are
or how middle you make designs can
reflect a whimsical part of someone's
person
or if someone's lost some time a morning
deciding what to wear or not to wear it
can be politically revolutionary
clothing is already plenty smarter and
it already has a big function in society
and
so recently what I found very
interesting is how introducing
technology and electronics can help
amplify or add or rather reintroduce
this richness that clothing possesses
so this is a project that's a favorite
of mine that uses this meta meta data
concept it's called spin and it creates
a narrative behind the creation of a
gift and this gift is an index card you
can embed photos and audio captured
along
its journey of creation that you can
then share later on with the person who
receives the gift
so I feel like something like this could
really change our view of something from
disposable to a treasured heirloom
something that can be shared and passed
on
now sort of mentioning that creating
this metadata would also be creating
some serious security risks which again
is why I think it's important to lift
the hood of how these things work and
how production works how things are made
to help bring them back to the community
and out of the conglomerate's grass
so another way I think technology today
can help
perhaps change the way we value things
is the open-source culture it's gone
from sharing source code to an ideology
of collaboration transparency and rapid
prototyping
in fashion and textiles and electronics
have followed suit designers are
starting to offer a bill of materials
and instructions on how to build
knitting machines and looms that allow
the wear to create their own clothing
using digital files
and designers partly sourcing their
fashion collections you can download cut
and put together this collection called
post picked or even eliminate sewing
through a tab and slot interlocking
system
so modularity is a concept also to be
looked at this is a modular phone made
by a company called faux box and their
motto is a phone worth keeping
this design allows the user to replace a
part of the phone if it wears out or
breaks camera a USB port the screen even
which happens love so instead of getting
a whole new phone you can just swap by
your screen or the module only and this
also leads to customizations who as
little or as many features as you want
people feel more personal
so to make things last
they must evolve and
you know we don't always want to be
limited to where in just a few garments
for the rest of our lives right people's
taste and their needs change
so clothing and electronics can evolve
through something like a modular system
that I just showed but they can also
evolved by recycling
William McDonald and Michael Brown
guards book cradle-to-cradle break and
of use materials and abuse product
materials into two categories
the versus segment gold nutrients and
this is a synthetic material as
manufactured by humans like plastics and
metals that can be used many times over
but without a loss of quality is staying
within a continuous cycle of recycling
they use
and the second is
biological nutrients and these are
materials that are organic and that can
decompose into the natural environment
such as soil and water
they also go on to define the mixture of
these technical and biological nutrients
that they that cannot be separated and
recovered products in life and they call
these products monster hybrids
hybrids typically also cannot be upcycle
door down cycles but instead end up in
landfills and incinerators
so I think this is where material
innovation can win this hand fabric from
grown from bacteria or fungi that's
biodegradable or you can using common
materials that we already have such as
cotton and wool and then couple these
biomaterials with the technical material
such as metal so they can easily compose
or dissolve within a custom-built system
that then allows you to extract the
metals easily to use again and as we go
forward with 3d printed fashion
maybe looking more at using
biodegradable filament that can break
down over time
so I think that overall getting people
more involved with the creation of their
clothing can cause them to value it
differently using animations like
virtual reality for example
to imagine different color designs that
are removable and 3d printed creating a
module environment that if you like the
color you can keep it or if you want to
swap it out for it a new one it can be
thrown in the garden into compost
so there are a lot of exciting
opportunities arising right now in the
fields wearable electronics and also
funding is happening right now that's
bringing it and and boosting
manufacturing on local soil so I just
think that this is a good time to start
thinking about how to make some
decisions of design that dynamo
sustainable ideology
I've seen innovation happen in small
clusters only to be brought to market by
companies that have more money to scale
afterwards and I've been within these
small clusters and I've talked to eleven
people
great colleagues and I've been said
Schengen to see what it would even take
to produce something that combines
electronics and fabric and it's nice for
my handful of manufacturers creating
textiles there isn't really anything
that existed together but with companies
like Google and Levi's creating project
jacquard for example and this
realization is now a goal and has the
money to back up
so I think it just all comes back to
what would we like to see become a new
reality as we build these new facilities
and and create these really exciting and
innovating new products or projects
I'm not trying to necessarily come with
any easy solutions for some of the
world's really large-scale problems but
rather I just wanted to come and share
with you guys some of the concerns and
topics of interest that I've been
thinking about and that I think are
important to consider as I see wearable
electronics begin to scale as an
industry
thank you
[Applause]
[Music]